Chapter 10. Functions

The smaller the function, the greater the management.

    C. Northcote Parkinson

So far, all our Python code examples have been little fragments. 
These are good for small tasks, but no one wants to retype fragments all the time. 
We need a way of organizing larger code into manageable pieces and making it reusable.

The first step to code reuse is the function: a named piece of code, separate from all others. 
A function can take any number and type of input parameters and return a result. 

You can take two actions with a function:

    Define it, with zero or more parameters

    Call it with zero or more arguments, and get a result

To define a Python function, you type def, the function name, parentheses enclosing any input parameters to the function, and then finally, a colon (:). 
Function names have the same rules as variable names (they must start with a letter or _ and contain only letters, numbers, or _).

The values you pass into the function when you call it are known as arguments. 
When you call a function with arguments, the values of those arguments are copied to their corresponding parameters inside the function.
Saying it another way: they’re called arguments outside the function, but parameters inside.

The function does the following:

    Assigns the value blue to the function’s internal color parameter

    Runs through the if-elif-else logic chain

    Returns a string

The caller then assigns the string to the variable comment.

A function can take any number of input arguments (including zero) of any type. It returns one result, of any type.
A function may appear to return multiple comma-separated values, but it’s a single tuple.
If a function doesn’t call return explicitly, the caller gets the result None.

None is a special singleton Python value that holds a place when there is nothing to say.
None is not the same as the Boolean value False, although it looks false when evaluated as a Boolean. 
To distinguish None from a Boolean False value, use Python’s is operator:

This seems like a subtle distinction, but it’s important in Python. 
You’ll need None to distinguish a missing value from an empty value. 
Remember that zero-valued integers or floats, empty strings (''), lists ([]), tuples ((,)), dictionaries ({}), and sets (set()) all evaluate to False but are not the same as None.

Python handles function arguments in a manner that’s very flexible when compared to many languages. 
The most familiar types of arguments are positional arguments, whose values are copied to their corresponding parameters in order.

To avoid positional argument confusion, you can specify arguments by the names of their corresponding parameters, 
even in a different order from their definition in the function:
You can mix positional and keyword arguments. 
If you call a function with both positional and keyword arguments, the positional arguments need to come first.
You can specify default values for parameters. 
The default is used if the caller does not provide a corresponding argument. 
This bland-sounding feature can be quite useful. 

Default parameter values are calculated when the function is defined, not when it is run. 
A common error with new (and sometimes not so new) Python programmers is to use a mutable data type such as a list or dictionary as a default parameter.

Pack/Unpack Positional Arguments with *

If you’ve programmed in C or C++, you might assume that an asterisk (*) in a Python program has something to do with a pointer. 
Technically, Python lets you create C-style pointers with the ctypes module, 
but you would never use them unless you were integrating Python and C code.

When used inside the function with a parameter, 
an asterisk groups a variable number of positional arguments into a single tuple of parameter values. 
In the following example, args is the parameter tuple that resulted from zero or more arguments that were passed to the function print_args():

If you call the function with no arguments, you get nothing in *args:

When using *, you don’t need to name the tuple parameter *args, but it’s a standard idiom in Python.

Let’s summarize:

    You can pass positional arguments to a function, which will match them inside to positional parameters. 
    This is what you’ve seen so far in this book.

    You can pass a tuple argument to a function, and inside it will be a tuple parameter. 
    This is a simple case of the preceding one.

    You can pass positional arguments to a function, and gather them inside as the parameter *args, 
    which resolves to the tuple args. This was described in this section.

    You can also “explode” a tuple argument called args to positional parameters *args inside the function, 
    which will be regathered inside into the tuple parameter args:

You can only use the * syntax in a function call or definition:

Let’s summarize:

    Outside the function, *args explodes the tuple args into comma-separated positional parameters.

    Inside the function, *args gathers all the positional arguments into a single args tuple. 
    You could use the names *params and params, but using *args for both the outside argument and inside parameter is common practice.

Readers with synesthesia might also faintly hear *args as puff-args on the outside and inhale-args on the inside, 
as values are either exploded or gathered.
Pack/Unpack Keyword Arguments with **

You can use two asterisks (**) to group keyword arguments into a dictionary, 
where the argument names are the keys, and their values are the corresponding dictionary values. 
The following example defines the print_kwargs() function to print its keyword arguments:

Using the variable name kwargs (meaning keyword arguments) with the ** is traditional but not required.

Inside the function, kwargs is a dictionary parameter.

You’ll generally see this argument order:

    Required positional arguments

    Optional positional arguments (*args)

    Optional keyword arguments (**kwargs)

Let’s summarize:

    You can pass keyword arguments to a function, which will match them inside to keyword parameters. 
    This is what you’ve seen so far.

    You can pass a dictionary argument to a function, and inside it will be dictionary parameters. 
    This is a simple case of the preceding one.

    You can pass one or more keyword arguments (name=value) to a function, and gather them inside as **kwargs, 
    which resolves to the dictionary parameter called kwargs. This was described in this section.

    Outside a function, **kwargs explodes a dictionary kwargs into name=value arguments.

    Inside a function’s parameter section, **kwargs gathers name=value arguments into the single dictionary parameter kwargs.

If auditory hallucinations help, imagine a puff for each asterisk exploding outside the function, and a little inhaling sound for each one gathering inside.
Keyword-Only (*) and Position-Only (/) Arguments

You may want an argument to be in a defined position, 
and that requires the use of a single slash (/) just after the position-only parameters:

It’s possible to pass in a keyword argument that has the same name as a positional parameter, 
probably not resulting in what you want. Python lets you specify keyword-only arguments. 
As the name says, they must be provided as name=value, not positionally as value.

First, let’s define a function that takes an iterable data argument and optional start and end indices:

We could call the arguments out of order by passing them all as keyword arguments:

Now let’s redefine the print_data() function. 
Adding a * in the function definition means that all the following parameters (in this example, start and end) 
must be provided as named arguments if we don’t want their default values:

If we use both * and /, then data must be the first argument, and start and end must be specified by keyword:

To recap: use / after position-only arguments, and * before keyword-only arguments.
Mutable and Immutable Arguments

Remember that if you assign the same list to two variables, 
you can change it by using either one? 
And that you cannot do that if the variables both refer to something like an integer or a string? 
That’s because a list is mutable (its value can change), and the integer and string are immutable (hands off).

You need to watch for the same behavior when passing arguments to functions. 
If an argument is mutable, its value can be changed from inside the function via its corresponding parameter:4

So, don’t do this. Either document that an argument may be changed or return the new value.

Readability counts, the Zen of Python verily saith. 
You can attach documentation to a function definition by including a string at the beginning of the function body. 
This is the function’s docstring:

You can make a docstring quite long, and even add rich formatting if you want:

def print_if_true(thing, check):
    '''
    Prints the first argument if a second argument is true.
    The operation is:
        1. Check whether the *second* argument is true.
        2. If it is, print the *first* argument.
    '''
    if check:
        print(thing)

To print a function’s docstring, call the Python help() function. 
Pass the function’s name to get a listing of arguments along with the nicely formatted docstring:

If you want to see just the raw docstring, without the formatting, use this:

In Python, everything that has a value is an object. 
This includes numbers, strings, tuples, lists, dictionaries—and functions as well. 
Functions are first-class citizens in Python. You can assign them to variables, use them as arguments to other functions, 
and return them from functions. This gives you the capability to do some tasks in Python that are difficult-to-impossible to carry out in some other languages.

You can combine this with the *args and **kwargs techniques.

You can use functions as elements of lists, tuples, sets, and dictionaries. 
Functions are immutable, so you can also use them as dictionary keys.
Function Arguments Are Not a Tuple

Even though we call functions with comma-separated arguments, they’re not the same as a tuple:

If you wrap the arguments in another pair of parentheses, then you have a single tuple:

As you saw in “Pack/Unpack Positional Arguments with *”, 
you can implode any number of arguments into a tuple parameter with *args:

Inner Functions

You can define a function within another function:
An inner function can be useful when performing a complex task more than once within another function, 
to avoid loops or code duplication. For a string example, this inner function adds text to its argument:

Closures

An inner function can act as a closure. 
This is a function that is dynamically generated by another function and can both change and remember the values of variables that were created outside the function.
They’re functions, but they’re also closures:

Anonymous Functions: Lambda

A Python lambda function is an anonymous function expressed as a single statement. 
You can use it instead of a normal tiny function.

A lambda has zero or more comma-separated arguments, followed by a colon (:), and then the definition of the function. 
We’re giving this lambda one argument, word. 
You don’t use parentheses with lambda as you would when calling a function created with def.

Often, using real functions such as enliven() is much clearer than using lambdas. 
Lambdas are mostly useful when you would otherwise need to define many tiny functions and remember what you called them all.

A generator is a Python sequence creation object. 
With it, you can iterate through potentially huge sequences without creating and storing the entire sequence in memory at once. 
Generators are often the source of data for iterators. 
As you may recall, we already used one of them, range(), 
in earlier code examples to generate a series of integers. which became the normal range() in Python 3. 
This example adds all the integers from 1 to 100:

Every time you iterate through a generator, it keeps track of where it was the last time it was called and returns the next value. 
This is different from a normal function, which has no memory of previous calls and always starts at its first line with the same state.

Generator Functions
If you want to create a potentially large sequence, you can write a generator function. 
This function returns its value with a yield statement rather than return. 
Let’s write our own simplified (positive steps only) version of range():

A simple generator can be run only once. 
Lists, sets, strings, and dictionaries exist in memory, 
but a generator creates its values on the fly and hands them out one at a time through an iterator. 
It doesn’t remember them, so you can’t restart or back up a generator.

You’ve seen comprehensions for lists, dictionaries, and sets. 
A generator comprehension looks like those but is surrounded by parentheses instead of square brackets or curly braces. 
A generator comprehension is like a shorthand version of a generator function, doing the yield invisibly, 
and also returns a generator object:

A decorator is a function that takes one function as input and returns another function. 
Let’s dig into our bag of Python tricks and use the following:

    *args and **kwargs

    Inner functions

    Functions as arguments

The document_it() function defines a decorator that will do the following:

    Print the function’s name and the values of its arguments

    Run the function with the arguments

    Print the result

    Return the modified function for use

Whatever func you pass to document_it(), you get a new function that includes the extra statements that document_it() adds. 
A decorator doesn’t have to run any code from func, but document_it() calls func partway through so that you get the results of func as well as all the extras.

As an alternative to the manual decorator assignment we just looked at, 
you can add @decorator_name before the function that you want to decorate:

You can have more than one decorator for a function. 
Let’s write another decorator called square_it() that squares the result:

Let’s try reversing the decorator order:

One last suggestion about decorators: use the wraps decorator from the functools module. 
This copies some extra data (like the function name and any docstring) from the original function to its decorated version. 
Here’s where you’d put it:

A name can refer to different things, depending on where it’s used. 
Python programs have various namespaces—sections within which a particular name is unique and unrelated to the same name in other namespaces.

Each function defines its own namespace. 
If you define a variable called x in a main program and another variable called x in a function, they refer to different things. 
But the walls can be breached: if you need to, you can access names in other namespaces in various ways.

The main part of a program defines the global namespace; thus, the variables in that namespace are global variables. 
To access the global variable rather than the local one within a function, 
you need to be explicit and use the global keyword (you knew this was coming: explicit is better than implicit):

If you don’t say global within a function, Python uses the local namespace, and the variable is local if it’s defined there. 
The variable goes away after the function completes.

Python provides two functions to access the contents of your namespaces:

    locals() returns a dictionary of the contents of the local namespace.

    globals() returns a dictionary of the contents of the global namespace.

The local namespace within change_local() contains only the local variable animal. 
The global namespace contains the separate global variable animal and a number of other elements.

Names that begin and end with double underscores (__, nicknamed dunder) are reserved for use within Python, 
so you should not use them with your own variables. 
This naming pattern was chosen because it seemed unlikely to be selected by application developers for their own variables.

So far, we’ve called functions that take some actions directly, and maybe call other functions. 
But what if a function calls itself?
This is called recursion. Like an unbroken infinite loop with while or for, 
you don’t want infinite recursion. Do we still need to worry about cracks in the space-time continuum? 
It’s a wonder it’s lasted this long.

Recursion is useful when you’re dealing with “uneven” data, like lists of lists of lists. 
Suppose that you want to “flatten” all sublists of a list, no matter how deeply nested.
A generator function is just the thing:

Python 3.3 added the yield from expression, which lets a generator hand off some work to another generator. 
We can use it to simplify flatten():

For most of Python’s existence, code was executed a line at a time, in order. 
If you called something that took a while, like accessing a web service or reading a file, 
you couldn’t do anything else until it finished.

Well, sort of. More recently, the keywords async and await were added to Python 3.5 to define and run asynchronous functions.

You’ll recognize an asynchronous function in two ways:

    It starts with async def instead of just def.

    It may contain at least one line containing the keyword await. 
    A normal function (defined with def) cannot contain an await.

For multiple reasons, I’ve pushed the details on all things async to Chapter 23, 
which covers the overall issue of concurrency, because of the following:

    Async is confusing.

    You don’t actually need to ever write an async function, although you should understand how one works.

    Alternative techniques, such as threads and multiprocessing, are available.

Exceptions

In some languages, errors are indicated by special function return values. 
When things go south,7 Python uses exceptions: code that is executed when an associated error occurs.

You’ve seen some of these already, such as accessing a list or tuple with an out-of-range position, 
or a dictionary with a nonexistent key. When you run code that might fail under some circumstances, 
you also need appropriate exception handlers to intercept any potential errors.

Adding exception handling anywhere an exception might occur is a good practice, 
to let the user know what is happening. 
You might not be able to fix the problem, but at least you can note the circumstances and shut down your program gracefully. 
If an exception occurs in a function and is not caught there, it bubbles up until it is caught by a matching handler in a calling function. 
If you don’t provide your own exception handler, Python prints an error message and information about where the error occurred and then terminates the program, as demonstrated in the following snippet:

Rather than leaving success to chance, use try to wrap your code, and except to provide the error handling:

Sometimes you want exception details beyond the type. 
You get the full exception object in the variable name if you use this form:

except exceptiontype as name

The example that follows looks for an IndexError first, 
because that’s the exception type raised when you provide an illegal position to a sequence. 
This code saves an IndexError exception in the variable err, and any other exception in the variable other. 
The example prints everything stored in other to show what you get in that object:

The try/except block may have a closing finally section. 
If it exists, it is always called, whether the try part or any except part succeeded. 
The finally section is meant to contain code to handle the result regardless of whether the previous code had a happy ending. 
An example might be to close an open file or make a final remark:
