Chapter 1. Introduction

Only ugly languages become popular. Python is the one exception.

    Don Knuth

Let’s begin with two mini-mysteries and their solutions. What do you think the following two lines mean?

(Row 1): (RS) K18,ssk,k1,turn work.
(Row 2): (WS) Sl 1 pwise,p5,p2tog,p1,turn.

This text snippet looks technical, like some kind of computer program. Actually, it’s a knitting pattern—specifically, 
a fragment describing how to turn the heel of a sock.

This fragment makes as much sense to me as a Sudoku puzzle does to my cat, 
but if you’re a knitter, you probably understand it perfectly.

Let’s try another mysterious text, found on an index card. 
You’ll figure out its purpose right away, although you might not know its final product:

  1/2 c. butter or margarine
  1/2 c. cream
  2 1/2 c. flour
  1 t. salt
  1 T. sugar
  4 c. riced potatoes (cold)

Be sure all ingredients are cold before adding flour.
Mix all ingredients.
Knead thoroughly.
Form into 20 balls. Store cold until the next step.
For each ball:
  Spread flour on cloth.
  Roll ball into a circle with a grooved rolling pin.
  Fry on griddle until brown spots appear.
  Turn over and fry other side.

Even if you don’t cook, you probably recognize that it’s a recipe,
a list of food ingredients followed by directions for preparation. 
But what does it make? It’s lefse, a Norwegian delicacy that resembles a tortilla.
Slather on some butter and jam or whatever you like, roll it up, and enjoy.

The knitting pattern and the recipe share some features:

    A regular vocabulary of words, abbreviations, and symbols. Some might be familiar, others mystifying.

    Rules about what can be said, and where—syntax.

    A sequence of operations to be performed in order.

    Sometimes, a repetition of some operations (a loop), such as the method for frying each piece of lefse.

    Sometimes, a reference to another sequence of operations (in computer terms, a function). 
    In the recipe, you might need to refer to another recipe for ricing potatoes.

    Assumed knowledge about the context. 
    The recipe assumes you that know what water is and how to boil it. 
    The knitting pattern assumes that you can knit and purl without stabbing yourself too often.

    Some data to be used, created, or modified—potatoes and yarn.

    The tools used to work with the data—pots, mixers, ovens, knitting sticks.

    An expected result. 
    In our examples, something for your feet and something for your stomach. 
    Just don’t mix them up.

Python is all of the following:

    A computer programming language

    Created in 1991 by the Dutch computer scientist Guido van Rossum

    Grown and guided by van Rossum and others since then

    Well designed

    Easier to read and write than most alternative languages

    A core of modern data science and artificial intelligence (AI) computing

    A valuable skill in today’s computing job market

    Useful for small scripts, but also huge systems like Instagram

The Python program has special words and symbols (for, in, print, commas, colons, parentheses, and so on) 
that are important parts of the language’s syntax (rules). 
The good news is that Python has a nicer syntax, and less of it to remember, than most computer languages. 
It seems more natural—almost like a recipe.

Most likely, you’re working on one of the three most prominent platforms:

    Microsoft Windows

    Apple macOS

    Linux or other Unix-like system

Programming is a text-heavy process. Modern operating systems highlight graphical user interfaces (GUIs) 
for most operations, but to write programs, you’ll need two tools on your computer:

    A terminal window for typing commands

    A text editor for creating and modifying files

In computing, it’s common to number software releases as x.y.z, where x is referred to as the major version, 
y is a minor (less extensive) version within x, and z is a small bug fix or other change within y.

As this book was written, the most recent major.minor release of Python was version 3.13. 
The major version 3 took about 10 years to replace the previous major version 2. 
The minor versions come out roughly annually

In your terminal window, your shell program (command interpreter) shows a prompt 
that indicates you can type a command right after it. 
The stuff that you type is shown in boldface. 
In this book, I’m using the simple $ as the prompt. Type the command python -V. You should see something like this:

$ python -V
Python 3.13

The program python can be run in two ways:

    Interactively—you type a line at a time and see what happens

    Execute a Python file

You save Python code in files with a .py extension. 
And you run a Python file by typing the command python, followed by the Python filename.

Always use a simple text editor or IDE to create your Python files. 
Programs like Microsoft Word may add font changes, quote substitutions, and other effects. You want plain old text.

Then, in your terminal window, tell Python to run the file:

$ python hello.py
Hello? World?

Normally, we use the interactive interpreter to test little chunks of code, and Python files for anything bigger.

You can install Python code written by anyone and can access it the same as you do the standard library. 

Most computing languages use character delimiters to indicate the start and end of multiline code blocks. 
Some use literal words like start and end, and the “curly brace” languages (C, C++, Java, JavaScript, and many others) 
use { and }. Python uses consistent indentation instead. It makes the code a bit less busy and easier to read.

This chapter listed the minimal tools that you’ll need to write Python programs, 
with code examples showing some basic Python data types like lists and strings. 
The chapter also included a larger sample program and its output.
