Chapter 6. If and Match

If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you, ...

    Rudyard Kipling, “If—”

A comment is a piece of text in your program that is ignored by the Python interpreter. 
You might use comments to clarify nearby Python code, make notes to yourself to fix something someday, or for whatever purpose you like. 
You mark a comment by using the # character; everything from that point on to the end of the current line is part of the comment. 
You’ll usually see a comment on a line by itself, as shown here:

Programs are more readable when lines are reasonably short. 
The recommended (not required) maximum line length is 80 characters. 
If you can’t say everything you want to say in that length, you can use the continuation character: \ (backslash). 
Just put \ at the end of a line, and Python will suddenly act as though you’re still on the same line.

The if and else lines are Python statements that check whether a condition (here, the value of disaster) is a Boolean True value, or can be evaluated as True. 
Remember, print() is Python’s built-in function to print things, normally to your screen.

In Python, indentation determines how the if and else sections are paired. 
Our first test was to check furry. Because furry is True, Python goes to the indented if large test. 
Because we had set large to True, if large is evaluated as True, and the following else line is ignored. 
This makes Python run the line indented under if large: and print It's a yeti.

If there are more than two possibilities to test, use if for the first, elif (meaning else if) for the middle ones, and else for the last:

Arriving in Python 3.8 is the walrus operator, which looks like this:

name := expression

See the walrus? (Like a smiley, but tuskier.)

The match statement is a recent (version 3.10) addition to Python. 
It’s similar to the switch statement in other languages like C and Java. 
You give it a subject, then one or more patterns to match against that subject’s value and/or type:

match subject:
    case pattern1:
        # ...
    case pattern2:
        # ...
    # other patterns ...
    case _:
        # if nothing else matches

This match is not the same as the match() function in the regular expression library that you’ll see in Chapter 17.

You can make decisions with if, elif, and else. These are the first Python control structures. 
If you’re comparing a variable with more than one pattern, match is an alternative to if …​ elif …​ else lines.
