Chapter 4. Strings

I always liked strange characters.

  Tim Burton

Computer books often give the impression that programming is all about math. 
Actually, most programmers work with strings of text more often than numbers. 
Logical (and creative!) thinking is often more important than math skills.

Strings are our first example of a Python sequence. 
A sequence is an ordered collection of elements. 
Some of the information that you can get from any sequence are as follows:

  Whether an element is in the sequence

  The index of an element by its value

  The element at a particular index

  A slice of elements in a given range

  The length of the sequence

  The minimum and maximum element values

A Python string is a sequence of characters. But what’s a character? 
It’s the smallest unit in a writing system, and includes letters, digits, symbols, punctuation, 
and even whitespace or directives like line feeds. 
A character is defined by its meaning (how it’s used), not how it looks. 
It can have more than one visual representation (in different fonts), 
and more than one character can have the same appearance (such as the visual H, 
which means the H sound in the Latin alphabet but the Latin N sound in Cyrillic).

Unlike other languages, strings in Python are immutable. 
You can’t change a string in place, 
but you can copy parts of strings to a new string to get the same effect. 

Python has a few special types of strings, indicated by a letter before the first quote:

  f or F starts an f-string, used for formatting, and described near the end of this chapter.

  r or R starts a raw string, used to prevent escape sequences in the string (see “Escape with \” and 
  Chapter 19 for its use in string pattern matching).

  Then, there’s the combination fr (or FR, Fr, or fR) that starts a raw f-string.

  A u starts a Unicode string, which is the same as a plain string.

  And a b starts a value of type bytes (Chapter 5).

Why have two kinds of quote characters? The main purpose is to create strings containing quote characters. 
You can have single quotes inside double-quoted strings, or double quotes inside single-quoted strings:

Triple quotes aren’t very useful for short strings like these. 
Their most common use is to create multiline strings, like this classic poem from Edward Lear:

(EOL means an end-of-line exception.)

If you have multiple lines within triple quotes, the line-ending characters will be preserved in the string. 
If you have leading or trailing spaces, they’ll also be kept:

You can make a string from another data type by using the str() function:

Python lets you escape the meaning of some characters within strings to achieve effects that would otherwise be difficult to express. 
By preceding a character with a backslash (\), you give it a special meaning. 
The most common escape sequence is \n, which means to begin a new line. With this, you can create multiline strings from a one-line string:

(The final string has a terminating tab which, of course, you can’t see.)

You might also need \' or \" to specify a literal single or double quote inside a string that’s quoted by the same character:

As I mentioned early in this chapter, a raw string negates these escapes:

A raw string does not undo any real (not \n) newlines:

You can combine literal strings or string variables in Python by using the + operator:

Python does not add spaces for you when concatenating strings, 
so in some earlier examples, we needed to explicitly include spaces. 
Python does add a space between each argument to a print() statement and a newline at the end:

Duplicate with *

You use the * operator to duplicate a string. 

Notice that the * has higher precedence than +, so the string is duplicated before the line feed is tacked on.

To get a single character from a string, specify its offset inside square brackets after the string’s name. 
The first (leftmost) offset is 0, the next is 1, and so on. 
The last (rightmost) offset can be specified with –1 so you don’t have to count; going to the left are –2, –3, and so on:

Because strings are immutable, you can’t insert a character directly into one or change the character at a specific index. 
Let’s try to change Henny to Penny and see what happens:

You can extract a substring (a part of a string) from a string by using a slice. 
You define a slice by using square brackets, a start offset, an end offset, and an optional step count between them. 
You can omit some of these. The slice will include characters from offset start to one before end:

[:] extracts the entire sequence from start to end.

[ start :] specifies from the start offset to the end.

[: end ] specifies from the beginning to the end offset minus 1.

[ start : end ] indicates from the start offset to the end offset minus 1.

[ start : end : step ] extracts from the start offset to the end offset minus 1, skipping characters by step.

As before, offsets go 0, 1, and so on from the start to the right, and –1,–2, and so forth from the end to the left. 
If you don’t specify start, the slice uses 0 (the beginning). If you don’t specify end, it uses the end of the string.

(Again, the end needs to be one more than the actual offset.)

Get Length with len()

So far, we’ve used special punctuation characters such as + to manipulate strings. 
But Python has only so many of these. 
Now let’s begin to use some of Python’s built-in functions: named pieces of code that perform certain operations. 

The len() function counts characters in a string:

You can use the built-in split() function to break a string into a list of smaller strings based on a separator. 
Again, we look at lists in Chapter 8. 
A list is a sequence of values, separated by commas and surrounded by square brackets:

In the preceding example, the string is called tasks, and the string function is called split(), 
with the single separator argument ,. 
If you don’t specify a separator, split() uses any sequence of whitespace characters—newlines, spaces, and tabs:

Not too surprisingly, the join() function is the opposite of split(): it collapses a list of strings into a single string. 
The join() function looks a bit backward because you specify the string that glues everything together first and then the list of strings to glue: string .join( list ). 
So, to join the list lines with separating newlines, you would write '\n'.join(lines). 
As you’ll see in Chapter 8, one way to make a list is with square brackets ([ and ]) surrounding a comma-separated sequence of items. 

You use replace() for simple substring substitution. 
Give it the old substring, the new one, and the number of instances of the old substring to replace. 
The function returns the changed string but does not modify the original. 
If you omit this final count argument, join() replaces all instances. 
In this example, only one string (duck) is matched and replaced in the returned string:

It’s common to strip leading or trailing “padding” characters from a string, especially spaces. 
The strip() functions shown here assume that you want to get rid of whitespace characters (' ', '\t', '\n') 
if you don’t give them an argument. 
The strip() function strips both ends, lstrip() only from the left, and rstrip() only from the right. 
Let’s say the string variable world contains the string earth floating in spaces:

Python has two methods, find() and index(), for finding the offset of a substring, 
and has two versions of each (starting from the beginning or the end). 
They work the same if the substring is found. If it isn’t, find() returns -1, and index() raises an exception.

Besides the functions in the preceding section, Python has three ways of formatting strings:

  Old style (supported in Python 2 and 3)

  New style (Python 2.6 and up)

  F-strings (Python 3.6 and up)

You can add other values in the format string between the % and the type specifier to designate minimum and maximum widths, alignment, and character filling. 
This is a little language in its own right, and more limited than the one in the next two sections. 
Let’s take a quick look at these values:

  An initial % character.

  An optional alignment character: nothing or + means right-align, and - means left-align.

  An optional minwidth field width to use.

  An optional . character to separate minwidth and maxchars.

  An optional maxchars (if conversion type is s) indicating the number of characters to print from the data value. 
  If the conversion type is f, this specifies precision (the number of digits to print after the decimal point).

  The conversion type character from the earlier table.

“New style” formatting has the form format_string.format(data).

The format string is not exactly the same as the old style described in the preceding section. 
The simplest usage is demonstrated here:

These examples all print their arguments with default formats. 
New-style formatting has a slightly different format string definition from the old-style one (examples follow):

  An initial colon (:).

  An optional fill character (the default is ' ') to pad the value string if it’s shorter than minwidth.

  An optional alignment character. This time, left alignment is the default. The < character also means left, > means right, and ^ means center.

  An optional sign for numbers. Nothing means prepend a minus sign (-) only for negative numbers. Using ' ' means prepend a minus sign for negative numbers, and a space (' ') for positive ones.

  An optional minwidth.

  An optional period (.) to separate minwidth and maxchars.

  An optional maxchars.

  The conversion type.

Newest Style: f-strings

F-strings appeared in Python 3.6 and are now the recommended way of formatting strings.

To make an f-string, do the following:

  Type the letter f or F directly before the initial single- or triple-quote characters.

  Include variable names or expressions within curly braces ({}) to get their values interpolated into the string.

This approach is like the previous section’s new-style formatting, but without the format() function, and without empty brackets ({}) or positional ones ({1}) in the format string. 
F-strings use curly braces ({}) differently:

Strings are a strong component of the Python language. 
In usual daily programming jobs, you’ll probably spend a lot of time messing with strings. 
They’re an example of a sequence and include methods to access characters by their position or pattern.

Because strings are immutable, you can’t change the contents of one after it’s been defined. 
But you can use slices to copy out the characters that you want, and combine them with others to make a new string. 
Say you want to grab the first two and last two characters of an existing string, and add a ! in the middle (people have done stranger things):
