Preface

1 of the world’s most popular programming languages: Python. 
Contrast Python with other languages, to catch assumptions about how it works, especially with subtle differences.

Computing languages are easier to learn than human languages—they’re more concise and precise. 
Python is recognized as one of the easiest computing languages to learn, read, and write. 
It consists of data (like nouns in spoken languages), as well as instructions, or code (like verbs). 

Python language and its “batteries included” standard library, 
and advance to finding, downloading, installing, and using some good third-party packages. 
My emphasis is on whatever I’ve found useful in 20 years of production Python development.

A Python programmer might now be expected to know something about machine learning, queues, or Unicode. 

Outline

Part I (Chapters 1–12) explores the Python fortress, the basics of the Python language. 
You should read these chapters in order. 
I work up from the simplest data and code structures, combining them on the way into more detailed and realistic programs. 
You can try all the code in this part on your own machine.

Chapter 1, “Introduction”

    Computer programs are not that different from directions that you see every day. 
    Some little Python programs give you a glimpse of the language’s looks, capabilities, and uses in the real world. 
    You’ll see how to run a Python program within its interactive interpreter (or shell) or from a text file saved on your computer.

Chapter 2, “Types and Variables”

    Computer languages mix data and instructions. 
    Different types of data are stored and treated differently by the computer. 
    They may allow their values to be changed (mutable) or not (immutable). 
    In a Python program, data can be literal (numbers like 78, text strings like waffle) or represented by named variables. 
    Python treats variables like names or labels, which is different from many other languages and has important consequences.

Chapter 3, “Numbers”

    This chapter shows Python’s simplest data types: Booleans, integers, and floating-point numbers. 
    You’ll also learn the basic math operations. 
    The examples use Python’s interactive interpreter like a calculator.

Chapter 4, “Strings”

    Learn how to create, combine, change, retrieve, and print text strings. You’ll see much more in Chapter 19.

Chapter 5, “Bytes and Bytearray”

    Many data examples are binary and can be represented in Python by the bytes and bytearray data types. 
    Binary files are discussed in Chapter 20.

Chapter 6, “If and Match”

    We’ll bounce between Python’s nouns (data types) and verbs (program structures) for a few chapters. 
    Python code normally runs a line at a time, from the start to the end of a program. 
    The if code structure lets you run different lines of code, depending on a data comparison.

Chapter 7, “For and While”

    We’ll look at verbs again, and two ways to repeat code in a loop: for and while. 
    You’ll be introduced to a core Python concept: iterators.

Chapter 8, “Tuples and Lists”

    It’s time for the first of Python’s higher-level built-in data structures: lists and tuples. 
    These are sequences of values, like LEGOs for building much more complex data structures. 
    Step through them with iterators, and build lists quickly with comprehensions.

Chapter 9, “Dictionaries and Sets”

    Dictionaries (aka dicts) and sets let you save data by their values rather than their position. 
    This turns out to be handy and will be among your favorite Python features.

Chapter 10, “Functions”

    Weave the data and code structures of the previous chapters to compare, choose, or repeat. 
    Package code in functions and handle errors with exceptions.

Chapter 11, “Objects”

    The term object is a bit fuzzy—but important in many computer languages, including Python. 
    If you’ve done object-oriented programming in other languages, Python is a bit more relaxed. 
    This chapter explains how to use objects and classes, and when it’s better to use alternatives.

Chapter 12, “Modules and Packages”

    This chapter demonstrates how to scale out to larger code structures: modules, packages, and programs. 
    You’ll see where to put code and data, how to get data in and out, handle options, tour the Python standard library, 
    and take a glance at what lies beyond.

Part II (Chapters 13–16) goes beyond the language, into the tools and techniques you’ll need to do serious Python programming. 
This is an expansion of the single “Be a Pythonista” chapter of the second edition.

Chapter 13, “Development Environment”

    Here, we get into virtual environments (Python version control) and package management with pip and other tools.

Chapter 14, “Type Hints and Documentation”

    Although they’re completely optional to the Python interpreter itself, type hints really help make your code readable, 
    and they’re essential for FastAPI, Mojo, and other recent applications.

Chapter 15, “Testing”

    How do you know that your code works? Some techniques can save you a lot of time and grief.

Chapter 16, “Debugging”

    Sometimes you need to dig to find the problem.

Part III (Chapters 17–27) explores Python-inspired quests into specific application areas such as the web, databases, networks, and so on; 
read these chapters in any order you like.

Chapter 17, “Text Data”

    Go beyond the basic string description in Chapter 4: Unicode characters, regular expressions for text pattern matching, and more.

Chapter 18, “Binary Data”

    This area doesn’t seem to get much discussion in Python books. 
    You can do some tricky things in Python with nontextual data that you might think require a lower-level language like C.

Chapter 19, “Dates and Times”

    Dates and times can be messy to handle. This chapter shows common problems and useful solutions.

Chapter 20, “Files”

    Basic data storage uses files and directories. This chapter shows you how to create and use them.

Chapter 21, “Data in Time: Concurrency”

    This is the first hardcore system chapter. 
    Its theme is data in time—how to use programs, processes, threads, and asyncio to do more things at a time (concurrency).

Chapter 22, “Data in Space: Networks”

    Send your code and data through space in networks with services, protocols, and APIs. 
    Examples range from low-level TCP sockets, to messaging libraries and queuing systems, to cloud deployment.

Chapter 23, “Data in a Box: Persistent Storage”

    Data can be stored and retrieved with basic flat files and directories within filesystems. 
    They gain some structure with common text formats such as CSV, JSON, and XML. 
    As data gets larger and more complex, it needs the services of databases—traditional relational ones and newer NoSQL data stores.

Chapter 24, “The Web”

    The web gets its own chapter—clients, servers, APIs, and frameworks. 
    You’ll crawl and scrape websites and then build web applications with request parameters and templates.

Chapter 25, “Data Science”

    Python is right at home here, with a wide variety of tools and methods that are used in production systems every day.

Chapter 26, “AI”

    This new chapter is devoted to the timely subject of artificial intelligence. 
    Python has risen to prominence largely from its heavy use in data modeling and AI development. 
    This chapter documents various approaches to using and developing AI-based systems.

Chapter 27, “Performance”

    This is another new chapter, showing various methods of speeding up Python when it isn’t frisky enough. 
    I’ll introduce a recent Python superset called Mojo, which I think could have quite an impact if its development plans go well.

The Appendix, “Practice Answers”, contains answers to the end-of-chapter exercises.

Computer languages change over time as developers add features and fix mistakes. 
The examples in this book were written and tested with Python version 3.13, the most current as this book was being edited, 
and I’ll talk about its notable additions. The “What’s New in Python” page is a technical reference—a bit heavy when you’re just starting with Python, 
but may be useful in the future if you ever need to deal with different Python versions.

Even today, when you read about some cool-sounding tech (say, microservices or serverless), look for war stories:

    What are its limits?

    How do you fix it when it breaks?

    How does it perform?

    What are the security implications?
