Chapter 7. For and While

For a’ that, an’ a’ that,
Our toils obscure, an’ a’ that ...

    Robert Burns, “For a’ That and a’ That”

The simplest looping mechanism in Python is while. 

Using the interactive interpreter, try a simple loop that prints the numbers from 1 to 5:

If you want to loop until something occurs, but you’re not sure when that might happen, 
you can use an infinite loop with a break statement. 

Sometimes you don’t want to break out of a loop but just want to skip ahead to the next iteration for some reason. 

If the while loop ends normally (no break call), control passes to an optional else. 
You use this when you’ve coded a while loop to check for something and to break as soon as it’s found. 
The else runs if the while loop completes but the object is not found:

Python makes frequent use of iterators, for good reason. 
They make it possible for you to traverse data structures without knowing how large they are or how they are implemented. 

A break in a for loop breaks out of the loop, as it does for a while loop:

Inserting a continue in a for loop jumps to the next iteration of the loop, as it does for a while loop.

Similar to while, for has an optional else that checks whether the for has completed normally. If break was not called, the else statement is run.

This is useful when you want to verify that the previous for loop ran to completion instead of being stopped early with a break:

As with while, the use of else with for might seem nonintuitive. It makes more sense if you think of the for as looking for something, and else being called if you didn’t find it. To get the same effect without else, use a variable to indicate whether you found what you wanted in the for loop.

The range() function returns an object that generates a stream of numbers within a specified range, without first having to create and store a large data structure such as a list or tuple. 
This lets you create huge ranges without using all the memory in your computer and crashing your program.

You use range() similarly to the way you use slices: range( start, stop, step ). If you omit start, the range begins at 0. 
The only required value is stop; as with slices, the last value created will be just before stop. 
The default value of step is 1, but you can go backward with -1.

The object returned by range() is iterable, so you need to step through the values with for ... in, or convert the object to a sequence like a list. 
