Chapter 8. Tuples and Lists

The human animal differs from the lesser primates in his passion for lists.

    H. Allen Smith

Most computer languages can represent a sequence of items indexed by their integer position: first, second, 
and so on down to the last. You’ve already seen Python strings (Chapter 4; sequences of text characters) 
and bytes and bytearrays (Chapter 5; sequences of 8-bit binary values).

Python has more sequence structures: tuples and lists. 
These contain zero or more elements. 
Unlike strings, the elements can be of different types. 
In fact, each element can be any Python object. 
This lets you create structures as deep and complex as you like.

The original Latin word tuple, meaning plus, was pronounced tub-pull.
Create with Commas and ()

If you have more than one element, follow all but the last one with a comma:

Actually, having a comma after the last element doesn’t hurt (some languages are more picky about this):

Python includes parentheses when echoing a tuple. 
You often don’t need them when you define a tuple, but using parentheses is a little safer, 
and it helps to make the tuple more visible:

You do need the parentheses when commas might also have another use. 
In this example, you can create and assign a single-element tuple with just a trailing comma, 
but you can’t pass it as an argument to a function:

Tuples let you assign multiple variables at once:

This is sometimes called tuple unpacking. If the number of variables doesn’t match the length of the tuple, then oops:

You can use tuples to exchange values in one statement without using a temporary variable:

Create with tuple()

The tuple() conversion function makes tuples from other iterable objects:

As with any sequence, you get a single item from a tuple by providing its offset:

But you can’t modify an item by its offset. “It’s immutable!” shout the tuple’s lawyers:

As with strings, + combines two or more tuples:

Duplicate with *

Use * to make copies of a tuple, and combine them:

Comparing tuples works much like list comparisons:

Iterate with for and in

Tuple iteration is like iteration of other types:

You can’t! Like strings, tuples are immutable, so you can’t change an existing one. As you saw just before, you can concatenate (combine) tuples to make a new one, as you can with strings:

This means that you can appear to modify a tuple like this:

But it isn’t the same t1! Python made a new tuple from the original tuples pointed to by t1 and t2, 
and assigned the name t1 to this new tuple. 
In Python, variables are just names, not pointers to values. 
You can see with id() when a variable name is pointing to a new value:

Named Tuples

A named tuple is a variety of tuple that lets you access its elements by names as well as positions. 

Lists are good for keeping track of items by their order, especially when the order and contents might change. 
Unlike strings, lists are mutable. 
You can change a list in place, add new elements, and delete or replace existing elements. 
The same value can occur more than once in a list.
Create with []

A list is made from zero or more elements, separated by commas and surrounded by square brackets:

Create or Convert with list()

You can also make an empty list with the list() function:

Python’s list() function also converts other iterable data types (such as tuples, strings, sets, and dictionaries) to lists. 

Create from a String with split()

As I mentioned in “Split with split()”, use split() to chop a string into a list by a separator:

Get Items with a Slice

You can extract a subsequence of a list by using a slice:

A slice of a list is also a list.

None of these slices change the marxes list itself, because we don’t assign them to marxes. 
To reverse a list in place, use list.reverse():

The reverse() function changes the list but doesn’t return its value.

As you saw with strings, a slice can specify an invalid index but will not cause an exception. 
It will “snap” to the closest valid index or return nothing:

Add an Item to the End with append()

The traditional way of adding items to a list is to append() them one by one to the end. 
In the previous examples, we forgot Zeppo, but that’s all right because the list is mutable, so we can add him now:

Add an Item by Offset with insert()

The append() function adds items only to the end of the list. 
When you want to add an item before any offset in the list, use insert(). 
Offset 0 inserts at the beginning. 
An offset beyond the end of the list inserts at the end, like append(), 
so you don’t need to worry about Python throwing an exception:

Duplicate with *

In Chapter 4, you saw that you can duplicate a string’s characters with *. The same works for a list:

Combine with extend() or +

You can merge one list into another by using extend(). 
Suppose that a well-meaning person gives us a new list of Marxes called others, 
and we want to merge them into the main marxes list:

Alternatively, we can use + or +=:

If we had used append(), others would have been added as a single list item rather than merging its items:

You can’t change a character in a string in this way, because strings are immutable. 
Lists are mutable. 
You can change the number of items a list contains as well as the items themselves.
Change Items with a Slice

Delete an Item by Offset with del

del is a Python statement, not a list method—you don’t say marxes[-1].del(). 
It’s sort of the reverse of assignment (=): 
it detaches a name from a Python object and can free up the object’s memory if that name was the last reference to it.
Delete an Item by Value with remove()

If you had duplicate list items with the same value, remove() deletes only the first one it finds.
Get an Item by Offset and Delete It with pop()

It’s computing jargon time! Don’t worry, these won’t be on the final exam. 
If you use append() to add new items to the end and pop() to remove them from the same end, 
you’ve implemented a data structure known as a last in, first out (LIFO) queue. 
This is more commonly known as a stack. Calling the pop(0) function would create a first in, first out (FIFO) queue. 
These are useful when you want to process data with the oldest first (FIFO) or the newest first (LIFO).
Delete All Items with clear()

Test for a Value with in

The Pythonic way to check for the existence of a value in a list is to use in:

The same value may be in more than one position in the list. As long as it’s in there at least once, in will return True:

Count Occurrences of a Value with count()

To count the number of times a particular value occurs in a list, use count():

Convert a List to a String with join()

You might be thinking that this seems a little backward. 
The function join() applies to a string, not a list. 
You can’t say marxes.join(', '), even though it seems more intuitive. 
The argument to join() is a string or any iterable sequence of strings (including a list), 
and its output is a string. If join() were just a list method, 
you couldn’t use it with other iterable objects such as tuples or strings. 
If you did want it to work with any iterable type, 
you’d need special code for each type to handle the actual joining. 
It might help to remember: join() is the opposite of split(), as shown here:

Reorder Items with sort() or sorted()

You’ll often need to sort the items in a list by their values rather than their offsets. Python provides two functions:

The list method sort() sorts the list itself, in place. It returns None.

The general function sorted() returns a sorted copy of the list.

If the items in the list are numeric, they’re sorted by default in ascending numeric order. 
If they’re strings, they’re sorted in alphabetical order:

Now, sorted_marxes is a new list, and creating it did not change the original list:

But calling the list function sort() on the marxes list does change marxes:

If the elements of your list are all of the same type (such as strings in marxes), 
sort() will work correctly. 
You can sometimes even mix types—for example, 
integers and floats—because they are automatically converted to one another by Python in expressions:

The default sort order is ascending, but you can add the argument reverse=True to set the order to descending:

Get Length with len()

The len() function returns the number of items in a list:

Assign with =

When you assign one list to more than one variable, 
changing the list in one place also changes it in the other, as illustrated here:
Remember the box (object) and string with note (variable name) analogy in Chapter 2? 
The variable b just refers to the same list object as a (both name strings lead to the same object box). 
Whether we change the list contents by using the name a or b, it’s reflected in both:

All mutable types in Python share this behavior.
Copy with copy(), list(), or a Slice

You can copy the values of a list to an independent, fresh list by using any of these methods:

The list copy() method

The list() conversion function

The list slice [:]

Copy Everything with deepcopy()

The copy() function works well if the list values are all immutable. 
As you’ve seen before, mutable values (like lists, sets, or dicts) are references. 
A change in the original or the copy would be reflected in both.

The deepcopy() function can handle deeply nested lists, dictionaries, and other objects.

You can directly compare lists with the comparison operators like ==, <, and so on. 
The operators walk through both lists, comparing elements at the same offsets. 
If list a is shorter than list b, and all its elements are equal, a is less than b:

Iterate with for and in

Python has more nice iteration tricks: iterating over multiple sequences in parallel by using the zip() function:

The zip() function stops when the shortest sequence is done. 
One of the lists (desserts) is longer than the others, so no one gets any pudding unless we extend the other lists. 
Read “Iterate Multiple Sequences with zip_longest()” for a new function that gives you more control if the sequences have different lengths.

Chapter 9 shows you how the dict() function can create dictionaries from two-item sequences like tuples, lists, or strings. 
You can use zip() to walk through multiple sequences and make tuples from items at the same offsets. 
Let’s make two tuples of corresponding English and French words:

Iterate Multiple Sequences with zip_longest()

As you just saw, plain zip() runs out of gas when the shortest sequence ends. 
But a variant keeps going until the longest sequence ends. 
The zip_longest() function will supply None unless you provide a fillvalue for the unmatched items at the end of the shorter sequence:

Create a List with a Comprehension

You saw how to create a list with square brackets or the list() function. 
Here, we look at how to create a list with a list comprehension, which incorporates the for/in iteration that you just saw.

All these approaches are valid Python code and will produce the same result. 
However, a more Pythonic (and often faster) way to build a list is by using a list comprehension. 
The simplest form of list comprehension looks like this:

[expression for item in iterable]

The list comprehension moves the loop inside the square brackets. 
This comprehension example really wasn’t simpler than the previous example, 
but there’s more that you can do. A list comprehension can include a conditional expression, looking something like this:

[expression for item in iterable if condition]

Lists can contain elements of different types, including other lists, as illustrated here:

You can often use tuples in place of lists, but they have fewer functions (there is no append(), insert(), and so on) 
because tuples can’t be modified after creation. Why not just use lists instead of tuples everywhere?

Tuples use less space.

You can’t clobber tuple items by mistake.

You can use tuples as dictionary keys (see Chapter 9).

Named tuples (see “Named Tuples”) can be a simple alternative to objects.

Mutable types (lists, dictionaries, and sets) have comprehensions. 
Immutable types like strings and tuples need to be created with the other methods listed in their sections.

You might have thought that changing the square brackets of a list comprehension to parentheses would create a tuple comprehension. 
And that change would appear to work because no exception occurs if you type this:

The thing within the parentheses is something else entirely: a generator comprehension, and it returns a generator object:

Tuples and lists are sequences, and you access their elements by their relative positions. 
Lists can also be changed in place (mutable), but tuples can’t (immutable). 
Sequences are a type of iterable that you can step through with for and in.
