Chapter 11. Objects

No object is mysterious. The mystery is your eye.

    Elizabeth Bowen

Take an object. Do something to it. Do something else to it.

    Jasper Johns

As I’ve mentioned on various pages, everything in Python, from numbers to functions, is an object. However, Python hides most of the object machinery by means of special syntax. You can type num = 7 to create an object of type integer with the value 7, and assign an object reference to the name num. The only time you need to look inside objects is when you want to make your own or modify the behavior of existing objects. You’ll see how to do both in this chapter.
What Are Objects?

An object is a data structure containing both data (variables, called attributes) and code (functions, called methods). An object represents a unique instance of a concrete thing. Think of objects as nouns and their methods as verbs. An object represents an individual thing, and its methods define the way it interacts with other things.

For example, the integer object with the value 7 is an object that facilitates methods such as addition and multiplication, as you saw in Chapter 3. But 8 is a different object. This means an integer class is built in somewhere in Python, to which both 7 and 8 belong. The strings cat and duck are also objects in Python, and have string methods that you’ve seen in Chapter 4, such as capitalize() and replace().

Unlike modules (coming in Chapter 12), you can have multiple objects of the same class (often referred to as instances) at the same time, each with potentially different attributes. They’re like super data structures, with code thrown in.
Simple Objects

Let’s start with basic object classes; we’ll save the discussion of inheritance for a few pages.
Define a Class with class

To create a new object that no one has ever created before, you first define a class that indicates what that object contains.

In Chapter 2, I compared an object to a plastic box. A class is like the mold that makes that box. For instance, Python has a built-in class that makes string objects such as cat and duck, and the other standard data types—lists, dictionaries, and so on. To create your own custom object in Python, you first need to define a class by using the class keyword. Let’s walk through some simple examples.

Suppose that you want to define objects to represent information about cats.1 Each object will represent one feline. You’ll first want to define a class called Cat as the mold. In the examples that follow, we try more than one version of this class as we build up from the simplest class to ones that do something useful.

Note
Just as with functions, we need to say pass to indicate that this class is empty. This definition is the bare minimum to create an object.

You create an object from a class by calling the class name as though it were a function:

In this case, calling Cat() creates two individual objects from the Cat class, and we assign them to the names a_cat and another_cat. But our Cat class has no other code, so the objects that we create from it just sit there and can’t do much else.

Well, they can do a little.
Assign Attributes

An attribute is a variable inside a class or object. When an object or class is created, as well as afterward, you can assign attributes to it. An attribute can be any other object. Let’s make two cat objects again:

When we defined the Cat class, we didn’t specify how to print an object from that class. Python jumps in and prints something like <__main__.Cat object at 0x100cd1da0>. In “Magic Methods”, you’ll see how to change this default behavior.

Because nemesis is an attribute referring to another Cat object, we can use a_cat​.nem⁠esis to access it, but this other object doesn’t have a name attribute yet:

Even the simplest object like this one can be used to store multiple attributes. So, you can use multiple objects to store different values, instead of using something like a list or dictionary.

When you hear attributes, it usually means object attributes. Python also has class attributes, and you’ll see the differences in “Class and Object Attributes”.
Methods

A method is a function in a class or object. A method looks like any other function but can be used in special ways that you’ll see in “Properties for Attribute Access” and “Method Types”.
Initialization

An object instance is first created with the __new__() method, but this happens behind the scenes, and you normally don’t even see this. The next step is initialization, handled by __init__(): Here’s a minimal example:

This is what you’ll see in real Python class definitions. I admit that __init__() and self look strange. That __init__() is the special Python name for a method that initializes an individual object from its class definition.2 The self argument specifies that it refers to the individual object itself.

When you define __init__() in a class definition, its first parameter should be named self. Although self is not a reserved word in Python, it’s common usage. No one reading your code later (including you!) will need to guess what you meant if you use self.

But even this second Cat class definition doesn’t create an object that really does anything. The third try is the charm that really shows how to create a simple object in Python and assign one of its attributes. This time, we add the parameter name to the initialization method:

Now we can create an object from the Cat class by passing a string for the name parameter:

Here’s what this line of code does:

    Looks up the definition of the Cat class

    Instantiates (creates) a new object in memory

    Calls the object’s __init__() method, passing this newly created object as self and the other argument (Grumpy) as name

    Stores the value of name in the object

    Returns the new object

    Attaches the variable furball to the object

This new object is like any other object in Python. You can use it as an element of a list, tuple, dictionary, or set. You can pass the object to a function as an argument, or return it as a result.

What about the name value that we passed in? It is saved with the object as an attribute. You can read and write it directly:

Remember, inside the Cat class definition, you access the name attribute as self.name. When you create an actual object and assign it to a variable like furball, you refer to it as furball.name.

It is not necessary to have an __init__() method in every class definition; this method is used to do anything that’s needed to distinguish this object from others created from the same class. It’s not what some other languages would call a constructor. Python already constructed the object for you. Think of __init__() as an initializer.
Note

You can make many individual objects from a single class. But remember that Python implements data as objects, so the class itself is also an object. However, your program has only one class object. If you defined class Cat as we did here, it’s like the Highlander—there can be only one—in that namespace.
Inheritance

When you’re trying to solve a coding problem, often you’ll find an existing class that creates objects that do almost what you need. What can you do?

You could modify this old class, but you’ll make it more complicated, and you might break something that used to work. Or you could write a new class, cutting and pasting from the old one and merging your new code. But this means that you have more code to maintain, and the parts of the old and new classes that used to work the same might drift apart because they’re now in separate places.

One solution is inheritance: creating a new class from an existing class, but with additions or changes. This approach is a good way to reuse code. When you use inheritance, the new class can automatically use all the code from the old class but without you needing to copy any of it.
Note

The current consensus favors composition over inheritance in most situations. I’ll get to that shortly, but knowing how inheritance works is helpful.
Inherit from a Parent Class

You define only what you need to add or change in the new class, and this overrides the behavior of the old class. The original class is called a parent, superclass, or base class; the new class is called a child, subclass, or derived class. These terms are interchangeable in object-oriented programming.

So, let’s inherit something. In the next example, we define an empty class called Car. Next, we define a subclass of Car called Yugo.3 You define a subclass by using the same class keyword but with the parent class name inside the parentheses (class Yugo(Car) here):

You can check whether a class is derived from another class by using issubclass():

Next, create an object from each class:

A child class is a specialization of a parent class; in object-oriented lingo, Yugo is-a Car. The object named give_me_a_yugo is an instance of class Yugo, but the object also inherits whatever a Car can do. In this case, Car and Yugo are as useful as deckhands on a submarine, so let’s try new class definitions that actually do something:

Finally, make one object from each class and call the exclaim() method:

Without doing anything special, Yugo inherits the exclaim() method from Car. In fact, Yugo says that it is a Car (generically true, but potentially specialized), which might lead to an identity crisis. Let’s see what we can do about that.
Note

Inheritance is appealing but can be overused. Years of object-oriented programming experience have shown that too much use of inheritance can make programs hard to manage. Instead, emphasizing other techniques like aggregation and composition is often recommended. We get to these alternatives in “Aggregation and Composition”.
Override a Method

As you just saw, a new class initially inherits everything from its parent class. Moving forward, you’ll see how to replace or override a parent method. Yugo should probably be different from Car in some way; otherwise, what’s the point of defining a new class? Let’s change how the exclaim() method works for a Yugo:

Now make two objects from these classes:

What do they say?

In these examples, we override the exclaim() method. We can override any methods, including __init__(). Here’s another example that uses a Person class. Let’s make subclasses that represent doctors (MDPerson) and lawyers (JDPerson):

In these cases, the initialization method __init__() takes the same arguments as the parent Person class but stores the value of name differently inside the object instance:

Add a Method

The child class can also add a method that is not present in its parent class. Going back to the Car and Yugo classes, we’ll define the new method need_a_push() for class Yugo only:

Next, make a Car and a Yugo:

A Yugo object can react to a need_a_push() method call:

But a generic Car object cannot:

At this point, a Yugo can do something that a Car cannot, and the distinct personality of a Yugo can emerge.
Get Help from Your Parent with super()

We saw how the child class could add or override a method from the parent. What if the class wants to call that parent method? “I’m glad you asked,” says super(). Here, we define a new class called EmailPerson that represents a Person with an email address. First, our familiar Person definition:

Notice that the __init__() call in the following subclass has an additional email parameter:

       self.email = email

When you define an __init__() method for your class, you’re replacing the __init__() method of its parent class, and the latter is not called automatically anymore. As a result, we need to call it explicitly. Here’s what’s happening:

    The super() function gets the definition of the parent class, Person.

    The __init__() method calls the Person.__init__() method. It takes care of passing the self argument to the superclass, so you just need to give it any optional arguments. In our case, the only other argument Person() accepts is name.

    The self.email = email line is the new code that makes this EmailPerson different from a Person.

Moving on, let’s make one of these creatures:

bob = EmailPerson('Bob Frapples', 'bob@frapples.com')

We should be able to access both the name and email attributes:

We could have done that, but it would have defeated our use of inheritance. We use super() to make Person do its work, the same as a plain Person object would. There’s another benefit: if the definition of Person changes in the future, using super() will ensure that the attributes and methods that EmailPerson inherits from Person will reflect the change.

Use super() when the child is doing something its own way but still needs something from the parent (as in real life).
Use Multiple Inheritance

You’ve just seen some class examples with no parent class, and some with one. Actually, objects can inherit from multiple parent classes.

If your class refers to a method or attribute that it doesn’t have, Python will look in all the parents. What if more than one of them has something with that name? Who wins?

Unlike inheritance in people, where a dominant gene wins no matter who it came from, inheritance in Python depends on method resolution order. Each Python class has a special method called mro() that returns a list of the classes that would be visited to find a method or attribute for an object of that class. A similar attribute, called __mro__, is a tuple of those classes. Like a sudden-death playoff, the first one wins.

Here, we define a top Animal class, two child classes (Horse and Donkey), and then two derived from these:4

If we look for a method or attribute of a Mule, Python will look at the following sources, in this order:

    The object itself (of type Mule)

    The object’s class (Mule)

    The class’s first parent class (Donkey)

    The class’s second parent class (Horse)

    The grandparent class (Animal)

The process is much the same for a Hinny, but with Horse before Donkey:

We list the parent classes in (father, mother) order, so they talk like their dads.

If the Horse and Donkey did not have a says() method, the mule or hinny would have used the grandparent Animal class’s says() method, and returned I speak!.
Include Mixins

You may include an extra parent class in your class definition, but as a helper only. If you control all the class code, it doesn’t share any methods with the other parent classes, and avoids the method resolution ambiguity that I mentioned in the previous section.

Such a parent class is sometimes called a mixin class. Uses might include “side” tasks like logging. Here’s a mixin that pretty-prints an object’s attributes:

In self Defense

One criticism of Python (besides the use of whitespace) is the need to include self as the first argument to instance methods (the kind of method you’ve seen in the previous examples). Python uses the self argument to find the right object’s attributes and methods. A defense against this criticism is that Python always favors the explicit, visible approach over the implicit, esoteric one. For an example, I’ll show how you would call an object’s method, and what Python does behind the scenes.

Remember the Car class from earlier examples? Let’s call its exclaim() method again:

Here’s what Python does, under the hood:

    Look up the class (Car) of the object a_car

    Pass the object a_car to the exclaim() method of the Car class as the self parameter

Just for fun, you can even run the code this way yourself, and it will work the same as the normal (a_car.exclaim()) syntax:

Car.exclaim(a_car)

However, there’s never a reason to use that lengthier style. I mean, come on, Guido did all that work.
Attribute Access

In Python, object attributes and methods are normally public (visible outside the object), and you’re expected to behave yourself (this is sometimes called a consenting adults policy). Let’s compare the direct approach with some alternatives.
Direct Access

As you’ve seen, you can get and set attribute values directly:

But if the attribute is visible and unprotected, anyone can change it:

The next two sections show ways to get some privacy for attributes that you don’t want anyone to stomp by accident.
Getters and Setters

Some object-oriented languages support private object attributes that can’t be accessed directly from the outside. Programmers then may need to write getter and setter methods to read and write the values of such private attributes.

Python doesn’t have private attributes, but you can write getters and setters with obfuscated attribute names to get a little privacy. (The best solution is to use properties, described in the next section.)

In the following example, we define a Duck class with a single instance attribute called _hidden_name. (I used an initial _ to hint that this attribute should be somewhat private.) We don’t want people to access this directly, so we define two methods: a getter (get_name()) and a setter (set_name()). I’ve added a print() statement to each method to show when it’s being called:

Properties for Attribute Access

The Pythonic solution for attribute privacy is to use properties.

You can do this in two ways. The first way is to add name = prop⁠erty​(get_name, set_name) as the final line of our previous Duck class definition:

The old getter and setter still work:

But now you can also use the property name to get and set the hidden name:

In the second approach, you add decorators and replace the getter and setter method names (get_name and set_name) with name:

    @property, which goes before the getter method

    @name.setter, which goes before the setter method

Here’s how they look in the code:

You can still access name as though it were an attribute:

Note

If anyone guessed that we called our attribute _hidden_name, they could still read and write it directly as fowl._hidden_name. In “Name Mangling for Privacy”, you’ll see how Python provides a special way to hide attribute names.
Properties for Computed Values

In the previous examples, we used the name property to refer to a single attribute (hidden_name) stored within the object.

A property can also return a computed value. Let’s define a Circle class that has a radius attribute and a computed diameter property:

Create a Circle object with an initial value for its radius:

We can refer to diameter as if it were an attribute such as radius:

Here’s the fun part: we can change the radius attribute at any time, and the diameter property will be computed from the current value of radius:

If you don’t specify a setter property for an attribute, you can’t set it from the outside. This is handy for read-only attributes:

Using a property over direct attribute access has one more advantage: if you ever change the definition of the attribute, you need to fix only the code within the class definition, not in all the callers.
Name Mangling for Privacy

In the Duck class example a little earlier, we called our (not completely) hidden attribute _hidden_name. Python has a naming convention for attributes that should not be visible outside their class definition: begin with two underscores (__).

Let’s rename hidden_name to __name, as demonstrated here:

Take a moment to see whether the code still works:

Looks good. And you can’t access the __name attribute:

This naming convention doesn’t make the attribute completely private, but Python does mangle its name to make it unlikely for external code to stumble upon it. If you’re curious and promise not to tell everyone,5 here’s what the name becomes:

Notice that the code doesn’t print inside the getter. Although this isn’t perfect protection, name mangling discourages accidental or intentional direct access to the attribute.
Class and Object Attributes

You can assign attributes to classes, and they’ll be inherited by their child objects:

But changing the value of the attribute in the child object doesn’t affect the class attribute:

If you change the class attribute later, it won’t affect existing child objects:

Method Types

Some methods are part of the class itself, some are part of the objects that are created from that class, and some are none of the above:

    If there’s no preceding decorator, it’s an instance method, and its first argument should be self to refer to the individual object itself.

    If there’s a preceding @classmethod decorator, it’s a class method, and its first argument should be cls (or anything, just not the reserved word class), referring to the class itself.

    If there’s a preceding @staticmethod decorator, it’s a static method, and its first argument isn’t an object or class.

The following sections have some details.

Instance Methods

When you see an initial self argument in methods within a class definition, it’s an instance method. These are the types of methods that you would normally write when creating your own classes. The first parameter of an instance method is self, and Python passes the object to the method when you call it. These are the ones that you’ve seen so far.

Class Methods

In contrast, a class method affects the class as a whole. Any change you make to the class affects all its objects. Within a class definition, a preceding @classmethod decorator indicates that the following function is a class method. Also, the first parameter to the method is the class itself. The Python tradition is to call the parameter cls, because class is a reserved word and can’t be used here. Let’s define a class method for A that counts the number of object instances that have been made from it:

Notice that we refer to A.count (the class attribute) in __init__() rather than self.count (which would be an object instance attribute). In the kids() method, we use cls.count, but we could just as well have used A.count.
Static Methods

A third type of method in a class definition affects neither the class nor its objects; it’s just there for convenience instead of floating around on its own. It’s a static method, preceded by a @staticmethod decorator, with no initial self or cls parameter. Here’s an example that serves as a commercial for the class CoyoteWeapon:

Notice that we don’t need to create an object from class CoyoteWeapon to access this method. Very class-y.
Duck Typing

Python has a loose implementation of polymorphism; it applies the same operation to different objects, based on the method’s name and arguments, regardless of their class.

Let’s use the same __init__() initializer for all three Quote classes now, but add two new functions:

    who() returns the value of the saved person string.

    says() returns the saved words string with the specific punctuation.

And here they are in action:

We don’t change how QuestionQuote or ExclamationQuote are initialized, so we don’t override their __init__() methods. Python then automatically calls the __init__() method of the parent class Quote to store the instance variables person and words. That’s why we can access self.words in objects created from the subclasses QuestionQuote and ExclamationQuote.

Next up, let’s make some objects:

Three versions of the says() method provide different behavior for the three classes. This is traditional polymorphism in object-oriented languages. Python goes a little further and lets you run the who() and says() methods of any objects that have them. Let’s define a class called BabblingBrook that has no relation to our previous woodsy hunter and huntees (descendants of the Quote class):

Now run the who() and says() methods of various objects, one (brook) completely unrelated to the others:

This behavior is sometimes called duck typing (Figure 11-1). The term comes from this old saying:

    If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck.

    A Wise Person

Who are we to argue with a wise saying about ducks?

Magic Methods

You can now create and use basic objects. What you’ll learn in this section might surprise you—in a good way.

When you type something such as a = 3 + 8, how do the integer objects with values 3 and 8 know how to implement +? Or, if you type name = "Daffy" + " " + "Duck", how does Python know that + now means to concatenate these strings? And how do a and name know how to use = to get the result? You can access these operators by using Python’s special methods (or, more dramatically, magic methods).

The names of these methods begin and end with double underscores (__). Why? They’re unlikely to have been chosen by programmers as variable names. You’ve already seen one: __init__() initializes a newly created object from its class definition and any arguments that were passed in. You’ve also seen how dunder naming helps mangle class attribute names as well as methods.

Suppose that you have a simple Word class, and you want an equals() method that compares two words but ignores case. That is, a Word containing the value ha would be considered equal to one containing HA.

The example that follows is a first attempt, with a normal method we’re calling equals(). The attribute self.text is the text string that this Word object contains, and the equals() method compares self.text with the text string of word2 (another Word object):

Then make three Word objects from three text strings:

When strings ha and HA are compared to lowercase, they should be equal:

But the string eh will not match ha:

We define the method equals() to do this lowercase conversion and comparison. It would be nice to just say if first == second, just like Python’s built-in types. So, let’s do that. We change the equals() method to the special name __eq__() (you’ll see why in a moment):

Let’s see whether this change works:

Magic! All we needed was the Python’s special method name for testing equality, __eq__(). Tables 11-1 and 11-2 list the names of the most useful magic methods.
Table 11-1. Magic methods for comparisonMethod	Description

Besides __init__(), you might find yourself using __str__() the most in your own methods. It’s how you print your object. It’s used by print(), str(), and the string formatters, which you can read about in Chapter 17. The interactive interpreter uses the __repr__() function to echo variables to output. If you fail to define either __str__() or __repr__(), you get Python’s default string version of your object:

When you’re creating your own classes, it can be tedious to write all these dunder methods. See “Dataclasses” for a time saver. To explore even more special methods, check out the Python documentation.
Aggregation and Composition

Inheritance is a good technique to use when you want a child class to act like its parent class most of the time (when child is-a parent). Building elaborate inheritance hierarchies is tempting, but this couples child classes tightly to details of the parent class.

Sometimes composition or aggregation make more sense. What’s the difference? In composition, one thing is part of another. A duck is-a bird (inheritance), but has-a tail (composition). A tail is not a kind of duck, but part of a duck. In this next example, let’s make bill and tail objects and provide them to a new duck object:

Aggregation expresses relationships but is a little looser: one thing uses another, but both exist independently. A duck uses a lake, but one is not a part of the other.
When to Use Objects or Something Else

Here are some guidelines for deciding whether to put your code and data in a class, module (discussion coming in Chapter 12), or something entirely different:

    Objects are most useful when you need individual instances that have similar behavior (methods) but differ in their internal states (attributes).

    Classes support inheritance; modules don’t.

    If you want only one of something, a module might be best. No matter how many times a Python module is referenced in a program, only one copy is loaded. (Java and C++ programmers: you can use a Python module as a singleton.)

    Alternatively, a class-based way to enforce a single behavior is to use the Borg pattern (named after aliens in Star Trek: The Next Generation).

    If you have variables that contain multiple values and can be passed as arguments to multiple functions, defining them as classes might be better. For example, you might use a dictionary with keys such as size and color to represent a color image. You could create a different dictionary for each image in your program, and pass them as arguments to functions such as scale() or transform(). This can get messy as you add keys and functions. It’s more coherent to define an Image class with attributes size or color and methods scale() and transform(). Then all the data and methods for a color image are defined in one place.

    Use the simplest solution to the problem. A dictionary, list, or tuple is simpler, smaller, and faster than a module, which is usually simpler than a class.

    Here’s some advice:

        Avoid overengineering datastructures. Tuples are better than objects (try namedtuple, too, though). Prefer simple fields over getter/setter functions. Built-in datatypes are your friends. Use more numbers, strings, tuples, lists, sets, dicts. Also check out the collections library, especially deque.

        Guido van Rossum

    As I mentioned a bit earlier, a newer alternative is the dataclass, described in “Dataclasses”.

Named Tuples

Because Guido just mentioned them and I haven’t yet, this is a good place to talk about named tuples. A named tuple is a subclass of tuples with which you can access values by name (with .name) as well as by position (with [ offset ]).

Let’s take the example from the previous section and convert the Duck class to a named tuple, with bill and tail as simple string attributes. We’ll call the namedtuple() function with two arguments:

    The name

    A string of the field names, separated by spaces

Named tuples are not automatically supplied with Python, so you need to load a module before using them. We do that in the first line of the following example:

You can also make a named tuple from a dictionary:

In the preceding code, take a look at **parts. This is a keyword argument. It extracts the keys and values from the parts dictionary and supplies them as arguments to Duck(). It has the same effect as this:

Named tuples are immutable, but you can replace one or more fields and return another named tuple:

We could have defined duck as a dictionary:

You can add fields to a dictionary:

But not to a named tuple:

To recap, here are some of the pros of a named tuple:

    It looks and acts like an immutable object.

    It is more space and time efficient than objects.

    You can access attributes by using dot notation instead of dictionary-style square brackets.

    You can use a named tuple as a dictionary key.

Dataclasses

Many people like to create objects mainly to store data (as object attributes), not so much behavior (methods). You just saw how named tuples can be an alternative data store. Python 3.7 introduced dataclasses.

Here’s a plain old object with a single name attribute:

Besides needing a @dataclass decorator, you define the class’s attributes with variable annotations of the form name: type or name: type = val, like color: str or color: str = "red". (Also see Chapter 14 on type hints.) The type can be any Python object type, including classes you’ve created, not just the built-in ones like str or int.

When you’re creating the dataclass object, you provide the arguments in the order in which they were specified in the class, or use named arguments in any order:

I haven’t mentioned that dataclasses define many features for you automatically, so you don’t have to write them, and this can be a big time saver. See “Data Classes in Python 3.7+” by Geir Arne Hjelle or the official (heavy) docs for many examples.
Attrs

You’ve seen how to create classes and add attributes, and how they can involve a lot of typing—steps like defining __init__(), assigning its arguments to self counterparts, and creating all those dunder methods like __str__(). Named tuples and dataclasses are alternatives in the standard library that may be easier when you mainly want to create a data collection.

“The One Python Library Everyone Needs” by Glyph Lefkowitz compares plain classes, named tuples, and dataclasses. It recommends the third-party package attrs for many reasons—less typing, data validation, and more. Take a look and see whether you prefer it to the built-in solutions.
Review/Preview

Objects! Whew. That’s a lot to absorb. But you should know that you may never need to define a class! It may sound heretical,6 but you can survive in Python by using all the other built-in data and code structures.

In fact, some of the reasons you would define an object class can also be handled by modules and packages, which are, conveniently, in the next chapter.
